# CHIK-X

Chikungunya-X (CHIK-X) is the a disease-X pathogen, a sister group which is related to extant Chikungunya (CHIK) viruses. Despite these similarities, CHIK-X is thought to have distinct transmission and disease characteristics from extant Chikungunya alphaviruses. This repo contains the code for an adapted metapopulation model for Chikungunya-X transmission on a country-level global scale. It is of a broader pipeline which aims to assess the health and economic impacts of evaluation of vaccine impact under different scenarios against CHIK-X in relation to the 100 days mission.

The code in this repository is based on Dr David Smith's code for Lassa-X transmission. David's code is associated with the following preprint:

> "Projecting health and economic impacts of Lassa vaccination campaigns in West Africa "
This code was developed by OxLiv Consortium members David R M Smith, Joanne Turner, Patrick Fahr, Paul Bessell, Emily Nixon, Koen Pouwels and Deirdre Hollingsworth.



# Repo structure

The following gives a high-level overview of the repo structure and components used/needed for the model to run.

```
./
│
│
├───data                    // data used by model components to run sims
├───figs                    // visualisations will be saved here
├───model                   // scripts to run model (single or param variations)
├───preprocessing           // data and scripts for raw data query and processing for model inputs 
│                                 // see preprocessing/README.md
├───res                     // results will be saved here
├───utils                   // utility functions: model components and visualisation functions 
└───visualisations          // functions to post-process results, plot and save figures 
```


Below are more details on the data files which are required by the model to run the simulations. These are generated by the scripts in the pre-processing directory (see `./preprocessing/README.md` for more details). Running `./1_CHIK-X_preprocessing_run.R` should generate these or similar files

# Data files 

```
./
│
└───data
       df_burden_with_pop_size_2015_spillover.csv       // geospatially estimated annual national incidence 
       df_mat_mob_n_daily_trips.csv                     // daily p(moving) with a fudge factor to speed 
       df_paho_daily_cases_fltrd_lagged_smooth.csv      // daily incidence data reported by PAHO
```


# Running the model: from preprocessing to visualisation 


1) Running all the preprocessing scripts

- This happens seamlessly via the `preprocessing/CHIK-X_preprocessing_run.R` script

2) Running the model 

- A single configuration of the model parameters can be run using `model/CHIK-X_run_single_scenario.R`
- A template for exploring variations of one parameter: `model/CHIK-X_run_scenarios.R`
- A template for varying incidence and noise to fine-tune the rate of CHIK-X spread: `model/CHIK-X_run_scenarios_baseline_noise.R`
- Several scenarios that explore different proportions of increased or decreased transmissibility by modifying the probability of outbreak establishment for the higher or lower suitability countries, respectively: `model/CHIK-X_run_scenarios_inc_dec.R`



